SIP-29: Snap Assets API (#154)
MetaMask/SIPs: SIPS/sip-29.md

## Motivation

To enable clients to be chain-agnostic, the logic for obtaining asset
information should be abstracted away from the client. Additionally, this SIP
defines the types that represent the asset information required by clients.

## Specification

> Indented sections like this are considered non-normative.

### Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" written
in uppercase in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC
2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt)

### Definitions

1. In this document, all definitions are written in TypeScript.

2. Any time an asset needs to be identified, it MUST use the [CAIP-19][caip-19]
   representation.

### Snap Manifest

This SIP introduces a new permission named `endowment:assets`.
This permission grants a Snap the ability to provide asset information to the client.

This permission is specified as follows in `snap.manifest.json` files:

```json
{
  "initialPermissions": {
    "endowment:assets": {
      "scopes": [
        "bip122:000000000019d6689c085ae165831e93"
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

> `scopes` - A non-empty array of CAIP-2 chain IDs that the Snap supports. This field is useful for a client in order to avoid unnecessary overhead. Any asset returned by the Snap must be from one of the supported chains otherwise it will get filtered out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`scopes` - A non-empty array of CAIP-2 chain IDs that the Snap supports. This field is useful for a client in order to avoid unnecessary overhead. Any asset returned by the Snap MUST filtered out if it isn't part of the supported scopes.
```

### Snap Implementation

Two methods are defined in the Snap Assets API:

Any Snap that wishes to provide asset information MUST implement the following API:

#### Get Assets Metadata

> `Caip19AssetType` -  A string that represents an asset using the [CAIP-19][caip-19] standard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Caip19AssetType` - A string that represents an asset using the [CAIP-19][caip-19] standard.
```

  // It means that 1 unit of the `from` asset should be converted to this amount
  // of the `to` asset.
  rate: string;

  // The UNIX timestamp of when the conversion rate was last updated.
  conversionTime: number;

  // The UNIX timestamp of when the conversion rate will expire.
  expirationTime?: number;
};

type FromAsset = Conversion["from"];

type ToAsset = Conversion["to"];

type OnAssetsConversionResponse = {
  conversionRates: Record<From, Record<To, AssetConversionRate>>;
};
```

## Appendix I: Fungible Asset Metadata

The following asset metadata fields for a fungible asset are defined.
As of the time of creation of this SIP, they are the only possible assets requested by clients.

```typescript
// Represents an asset unit.
type FungibleAssetUnit = {
  // Human-friendly name of the asset unit.
  name: string;

  // Ticker symbol of the asset unit.
  symbol: string;

  // Number of decimals of the asset unit.
  decimals: number;
};

// Fungible asset metadata.
type FungibleAssetMetadata = {
  // Human-friendly name of the asset.
  name: string;

  // Ticker symbol of the asset's main unit.
  symbol: string;

  // Represents a fungible asset
  fungible: true;

>   // data URI or URL representation of the asset icon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Data URI or URL representation of the asset icon.
```

  // It means that 1 unit of the `from` asset should be converted to this amount
  // of the `to` asset.
  rate: string;

  // The UNIX timestamp of when the conversion rate was last updated.
  conversionTime: number;

  // The UNIX timestamp of when the conversion rate will expire.
  expirationTime: number;
};

type FromAsset = Conversion["from"];

type ToAsset = Conversion["to"];

type OnAssetsConversionResponse = {
  conversionRates: Record<From, Record<To, AssetConversionRate>>;
};
```

## Appendix I: Fungible Asset Metadata

The following asset metadata fields for a fungible asset are defined.
As of the time of creation of this SIP, they are the only possible assets requested by clients.

```typescript
// Represents an asset unit.
type FungibleAssetUnit = {
  // Human-friendly name of the asset unit.
  name: string;

  // Ticker symbol of the asset unit.
  symbol: string;

  // Number of decimals of the asset unit.
  decimals: number;
};

// Fungible asset metadata.
type FungibleAssetMetadata = {
  // Human-friendly name of the asset.
  name: string;

  // Ticker symbol of the asset's main unit.
  symbol: string;

>   // Whether the asset is native to the chain.
>   native: boolean;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Motivation

To enable clients to be chain-agnostic, the logic for obtaining asset
information should be abstracted away from the client. Additionally, this SIP
defines the types that represent the asset information required by clients.

## Specification

> Indented sections like this are considered non-normative.

### Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" written
in uppercase in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC
2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt)

### Definitions

1. In this document, all definitions are written in TypeScript.

2. Any time an asset needs to be identified, it MUST use the [CAIP-19][caip-19]
representation.

### Snap Assets API

Two methods are defined in the Snap Assets API:

#### Get Token Description

```typescript
// Represents a token unit.
type TokenUnit = {
    // Human-friendly name of the token unit.
    name: string;

    // Ticker of the token unit.
    ticker: string;

    // Number of decimals of the token unit.
    decimals: number;
};

// Token description.

> type TokenDescription = {

Reviewer 2: We should probably keep a reference to the `CAIP-19` id here

// //             ticker: 'wei',
// //             decimals: 0
// //         }
// //     ]
// // }
// ```
function getTokenDescription(token: Caip19AssetType): TokenDescription;
```

#### Get Token Conversion Rate

```typescript
type TokenConversionRate = {
    // The rate of conversion from the source token to the target token. It
    // means that 1 unit of the `from` token should be converted to this amount
    // of the `to` token.
    rate: string;

    // The UNIX timestamp of when the conversion rate was last updated.
    conversionTime: number;

    // The UNIX timestamp of when the conversion rate will expire.
    expirationTime: number;
};

// Returns the conversion rate between two assets (tokens or fiat).
//
// @example
// ```typescript
// const conversionRate = await getTokenConversionRate(
//   'eip155:1/slip44:60',
//   'eip155:1/erc20:0x6b175474e89094c44da98b954eedeac495271d0f'
// );
//
// // Returns:
// // {
// //     rate: '3906.38',
// //     conversionTime: 1733389786,
// //     expirationTime: 1733389816,
// // }
// ```
function getTokenConversionRate(
    from: Caip19AssetType,
    to: Caip19AssetType
): TokenConversionRate;
```

> ### Fiat currency representation

Reviewer 2: We should create a CAIP for this

Author: This is a good point. This is technically CAIP-19, but with unregistered namespaces.

I started a [discussion](https://github.com/ChainAgnostic/CAIPs/discussions/338) on the CAIPs repo, let's see what other think of it.

Reviewer: What's the status of this discussion?

Author: It didn't move further. @GuillaumeRx, do you think you can check with CASA again?

Reviewer 2: Maybe it's good to bring @hmalik88 here.

Reviewer: Maybe worth removing this section from the spec for now and pursue it in parallel?

```

The country code is a two-letter lowercase code, as defined by ISO 3166-1
alpha-2, representing the emitter country, with the exception of the European
Union, which is represented by "eu".

The currency code is a three-letter uppercase code as defined by ISO 4217.

Examples:

```
# Euro
fiat:eu/currency:eur

# United States Dollar
fiat:us/currency:usd

# Brazilian Real
fiat:br/currency:brl

# Japanese Yen
fiat:jp/currency:jpy
```

## Appendix I: Fungible Asset Metadata

The following asset metadata fields for a fungible asset are defined.
As of the time of creation of this SIP, they are the only possible assets requested by clients.

```typescript
// Represents an asset unit.
type FungibleAssetUnit = {
  // Human-friendly name of the asset unit.
  name: string;

  // Ticker symbol of the asset unit.
  symbol: string;

  // Number of decimals of the asset unit.
  decimals: number;
};

// Fungible asset metadata.
type FungibleAssetMetadata = {
  // Human-friendly name of the asset.
  name: string;

  // Ticker symbol of the asset's main unit.
  symbol: string;

  // Whether the asset is native to the chain.
  native: boolean;

  // Represents a fungible asset
  fungible: true;

>   // Base64 representation of the asset icon.
>   iconBase64: string;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // URL of the asset icon.
  iconUrl: string;
```

Based on conversation in other threads on this PR

## Motivation

To enable clients to be chain-agnostic, the logic for obtaining asset
information should be abstracted away from the client. Additionally, this SIP
defines the types that represent the asset information required by clients.

## Specification

> Indented sections like this are considered non-normative.

### Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" written
in uppercase in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC
2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt)

### Definitions

1. In this document, all definitions are written in TypeScript.

2. Any time an asset needs to be identified, it MUST use the [CAIP-19][caip-19]
   representation.

### Snap Manifest

This SIP introduces a new permission named `endowment:assets`.
This permission grants a Snap the ability to provide asset information to the client.

This permission is specified as follows in `snap.manifest.json` files:

```json
{
  "initialPermissions": {
    "endowment:assets": {
      "scopes": [
        "bip122:000000000019d6689c085ae165831e93"
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

> `scopes` - A non-empty array of CAIP-2 chain IDs that the snap supports. This field is useful for a client in order to avoid unnecessary overhead.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`scopes` - A non-empty array of CAIP-2 chain IDs that the Snap supports. This field is useful for a client in order to avoid unnecessary overhead.
```

> `scopes` - A non-empty array of CAIP-2 chain IDs that the Snap supports. This field is useful for a client in order to avoid unnecessary overhead.

Reviewer 3: > to avoid unnecessary overhead.

Since this information would be static, will the Snap only be "restricted" to those scopes? Or can Snap also returns assets informations for other non-declared scopes?

Reviewer: My expectation for this would be that on the controller end we would only query this Snap for assets if we are interested in the scopes that it has.

Author: Indeed we should enforce that the Snap can return info only for assets under its scope. (This is an implementation detail of the controller.)

### Snap Implementation

Two methods are defined in the Snap Assets API:

> Any Snap that wishes to provide asset information **MUST** implement the following API:

Reviewer 3: Very nit: Other SIPs do not seem to use formatting for those keywords, so maybe we should remove it here too?

```suggestion
Any Snap that wishes to provide asset information MUST implement the following API:
```

#### Get Asset Metadata

```typescript
import { OnAssetLookupHandler } from "@metamask/snaps-sdk";

export const onAssetLookup: OnAssetLookupHandler = async ({
  assets
}) => {

>   const assetsMetadata = /* Get metadata */;

Reviewer 3: Nit: Just being explicit here:

```suggestion
  const assetsMetadata = /* Get metadata for given `assets` */;
```

  return { assets: assetsMetadata };
};
```

The type for an `onAssetLookup` handler function’s arguments is:

```typescript
interface OnAssetLookupArgs {
  assets: Caip19AssetType[];
}
```

The type for an `onAssetLookup` handler function’s return value is:

```typescript

> type OnAssetLookupReturn = {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type OnAssetLookupResponse = {
```

>   assets: Record<Caip19AssetType, AssetMetadata>;

Reviewer 3: Is the `AssetMetadata` type missing? Or should we make a reference to the `FungibleAssetMetadata`?

Could also be `type AssetMetadata = FungibleAssetMetadata` for now (if we omit the NFT support).

Author: Indeed, we forgot to add the type alias when we renamed the type from `AssetMetadata` to `FungibleAssetMetadata`.

};
```

#### Get Asset Conversion Rate

```typescript

> import { OnAssetConversionHandler } from "@metamask/snaps-sdk";

Reviewer 4: is this function implemented within the @metamask/snap-sdk ? is it part of the assets team scope ?

Author: No, the Assets team will be a caller of this method, but its implementation will be handled by other teams (Solana and Snaps).

export const onAssetConversion: OnAssetConversionHandler = async ({
  conversions
}) => {

>   const conversionRates = /* Get conversion rate */;

Reviewer 3: Nit:

```suggestion
  const conversionRates = /* Get conversion rate for given `conversions` */;
```

  return { conversionRates };
};
```

The type for an `onAssetConversion` handler function’s arguments is:

```typescript
type Conversion = {
  from: Caip19AssetType;
  to: Caip19AssetType;
};

type OnAssetConversionArgs = {
  conversions: Conversion[];
};
```

The type for an `onAssetConversion` handler function’s return value is:

```typescript

> type AssetConversionRate = {

Author: > How can we get historical market data?

Reviewer: Is this in scope?

Author: Not for v1. We might want to add it in the near future tho.

  // The rate of conversion from the source asset to the target asset. It
  // means that 1 unit of the `from` asset should be converted to this amount
  // of the `to` asset.
  rate: string;

  // The UNIX timestamp of when the conversion rate was last updated.
  conversionTime: number;

  // The UNIX timestamp of when the conversion rate will expire.

>   expirationTime: number;

Reviewer 4: hey @danroc 
The data we currently have does not include MarketData, which means we cannot display the 1-day price changes or chart-based price changes. I believe this should be updated to include an interface like the following:
```
interface MarketData {
	id: string;
	price: number;
	marketCap: number;
	allTimeHigh: number;
	allTimeLow: number;
	totalVolume: number;
	high1d: number;
	circulatingSupply: number;
	dilutedmarketCap: number;
	marketCapPercentChange1d: number;
	priceChange1d: number;
	pricePercentChange1h: number;
	pricePercentChange1d: number;
	pricePercentChange7d: number;
	pricePercentChange14d: number;
	pricePercentChange30d: number;
	pricePercentChange200d: number;
	pricePercentChange1y: number;
}
```

Author: Hey @salimtb, thanks! We didn’t plan to include market data in the first release, so we left it out of this API to give ourselves more time to figure out what’s really needed.

Are there any fields you’d like to add or remove from the current EVM implementation? Now might be a good time to make any changes you’ve been thinking about.

Also, it’s not a big deal if it gets added later to this SIP or even a new one.

Reviewer 4: thanks for your response, @danroc. Not all the fields are currently in use, but we decided to keep them for potential future features. If you'd like, I can provide you with a list of the properties that are currently being used.
all of the properties are returned by the endpoint `/spot-price` of the price API

};

type FromAsset = Conversion["from"];

type ToAsset = Conversion["to"];

> type OnAssetConversionReturn = {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type OnAssetConversionResponse = {
```

  conversionRates: Record<From, Record<To, AssetConversionRate>>;
};
```

### Fiat currency representation

> We SHOULD use CAIP-19 to represent fiat currencies as well. This approach

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We SHOULD use [CAIP-19][caip-19] to represent fiat currencies as well. This approach
```

reference:         country_code
asset_namespace:   "currency"
asset_reference:   currency_code
```

The country code is a two-letter lowercase code, as defined by ISO 3166-1
alpha-2, representing the emitter country, with the exception of the European
Union, which is represented by "eu".

The currency code is a three-letter uppercase code as defined by ISO 4217.

Examples:

```
# Euro
fiat:eu/currency:eur

# United States Dollar
fiat:us/currency:usd

# Brazilian Real
fiat:br/currency:brl

# Japanese Yen
fiat:jp/currency:jpy
```

## Appendix I: Fungible Asset Metadata

The following asset metadata fields for a fungible asset are defined.
As of the time of creation of this SIP, they are the only possible assets requested by clients.

```typescript
// Represents an asset unit.
type FungibleAssetUnit = {
  // Human-friendly name of the asset unit.
  name: string;

  // Ticker of the asset unit.
  ticker: string;

  // Number of decimals of the asset unit.
  decimals: number;
};

// Fungible asset metadata.
type FungibleAssetMetadata = {
  // Human-friendly name of the asset.
  name: string;

  // Ticker of the asset.
  ticker: string;

  // Whether the asset is native to the chain.

>   native: boolean;

Author: > How can we identify other types of tokens that need to be handled differently?

Reviewer 5: Some examples might be differentiating between brc-20 and rune tokens on bitcoin. Or eth, erc20s, and staking contracts on ethereum.  I anticipate more types of tokens than just native vs not. Not sure if anything built into caip19 already helps distinguish this.

Author: We can remove this field and use the asset namespace to determine its type.

Note that the [`slip44`](https://github.com/ChainAgnostic/CAIPs/blob/main/CAIPs/caip-20.md) namespace is used for native tokens, which means that this field can be removed.

  // Represents a fungible asset
  fungible: true;

  // Base64 representation of the asset icon.

>   iconBase64: string;

Author: > Can this be an URL link to the icon?

Reviewer 6: I think it has to be an icon, the static token icon server is going to return pngs

Reviewer 3: Nit: Do we want to limit the size of this icon somehow?

Author: @FrederikBolding, do you know if we have this use case in other APIs? If yes, what size limit did we use?

Reviewer: But if these are going to be URLs then we likely want to validate the URLs extensively instead of the content

Reviewer 2: Are we doing URLs or base64 strings ? We need to choose. IIRC the API is going to return a link, do we want to download the icon in the snap ?

Reviewer: I think we'll need to support both: https://github.com/MetaMask/SIPs/pull/154#discussion_r1923708203

Author: Agreed, we have the use case where Snaps will support only one asset (like Bitcoin), so it makes sense to allow the Snap to embed the image. For other chains, it makes sense to use URLs.

One proposed approach is to rename this property to `iconUrl` and allow [data URLs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/URI/Schemes/data).

"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" written
in uppercase in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC
2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt)

### Definitions

1. In this document, all definitions are written in TypeScript.

2. Any time an asset needs to be identified, it MUST use the [CAIP-19][caip-19]
   representation.

### Snap Manifest

This SIP introduces a new permission named `endowment:assets`.
This permission grants a Snap the ability to provide asset information to the client.

This permission is specified as follows in `snap.manifest.json` files:

```json
{
  "initialPermissions": {
    "endowment:assets": {
      "scopes": [
        "bip122:000000000019d6689c085ae165831e93"
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

`scopes` - A non-empty array of CAIP-2 chain IDs that the Snap supports. This field is useful for a client in order to avoid unnecessary overhead.

### Snap Implementation

Two methods are defined in the Snap Assets API:

Any Snap that wishes to provide asset information MUST implement the following API:

#### Get Asset Metadata

```typescript
import { OnAssetLookupHandler } from "@metamask/snaps-sdk";

> export const onAssetLookup: OnAssetLookupHandler = async ({

Reviewer 7: Maybe pluralise to match the permission name.

```suggestion
export const onAssetsLookup: OnAssetsLookupHandler = async ({
```

Reviewer: In that case, should we update the other handler too? 🤔

Reviewer 7: Yes, it should be consistent.

Reviewer 2: I agree

  assets
}) => {
  const assetsMetadata = /* Get metadata for given `assets` */;
  return { assets: assetsMetadata };
};
```

The type for an `onAssetLookup` handler function’s arguments is:

```typescript

> interface OnAssetLookupArgs {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interface OnAssetLookupArguments {
```

>   assets: Caip19AssetType[];

Reviewer: That's what the CAIP-19 identifier is also called: https://github.com/ChainAgnostic/CAIPs/blob/main/CAIPs/caip-19.md#specification-of-asset-type

>   assets: Caip19AssetType[];

Reviewer 7: That should be defined/clarified somewhere.

}
```

The type for an `onAssetLookup` handler function’s return value is:

```typescript
type OnAssetLookupResponse = {
  assets: Record<Caip19AssetType, AssetMetadata>;
};
```

#### Get Asset Conversion Rate

```typescript
import { OnAssetConversionHandler } from "@metamask/snaps-sdk";

export const onAssetConversion: OnAssetConversionHandler = async ({
  conversions
}) => {
  const conversionRates = /* Get conversion rate for given `conversions` */;
  return { conversionRates };
};
```

The type for an `onAssetConversion` handler function’s arguments is:

```typescript
type Conversion = {
  from: Caip19AssetType;
  to: Caip19AssetType;
};

> type OnAssetConversionArgs = {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type OnAssetConversionArguments = {
```

  conversions: Conversion[];
};
```

The type for an `onAssetConversion` handler function’s return value is:

```typescript
type AssetConversionRate = {
  // The rate of conversion from the source asset to the target asset. It
  // means that 1 unit of the `from` asset should be converted to this amount
  // of the `to` asset.

>   rate: string;

Reviewer: I'm assuming a regular decimal number, but we should clarify in the spec

  // The UNIX timestamp of when the conversion rate was last updated.
  conversionTime: number;

  // The UNIX timestamp of when the conversion rate will expire.

>   expirationTime: number;

Reviewer: If not, we could make it optional and have a reasonable fallback on our end

>   expirationTime: number;

Author: We can make it optional and assume that the `MultichainRatesController` will define default fallbacks.

alpha-2, representing the emitter country, with the exception of the European
Union, which is represented by "eu".

The currency code is a three-letter uppercase code as defined by ISO 4217.

Examples:

```
# Euro
fiat:eu/currency:eur

# United States Dollar
fiat:us/currency:usd

# Brazilian Real
fiat:br/currency:brl

# Japanese Yen
fiat:jp/currency:jpy
```

## Appendix I: Fungible Asset Metadata

The following asset metadata fields for a fungible asset are defined.
As of the time of creation of this SIP, they are the only possible assets requested by clients.

```typescript
// Represents an asset unit.
type FungibleAssetUnit = {
  // Human-friendly name of the asset unit.
  name: string;

  // Ticker symbol of the asset unit.
  symbol: string;

  // Number of decimals of the asset unit.
  decimals: number;
};

// Fungible asset metadata.
type FungibleAssetMetadata = {
  // Human-friendly name of the asset.
  name: string;

  // Ticker symbol of the asset's main unit.
  symbol: string;

  // Whether the asset is native to the chain.
  native: boolean;

  // Represents a fungible asset
  fungible: true;

  // Base64 representation of the asset icon.

>   iconBase64: string;

Author: @aganglada do you know which format is used by the "Icons API"?

>   iconBase64: string;

Reviewer 6: Image URLs

https://www.notion.so/metamask-consensys/Multichain-Initiative-wip-New-Chain-Agnostic-Endpoints-151f86d67d68809b8519e3841ea54061

>   iconBase64: string;

Reviewer: Seems like we should change this to be `iconUrl` then. We'll need to validate these beyond just checking that they are a string for safety.

>   iconBase64: string;

Reviewer: At the very least we should preserve some way to pass local images so that Snaps can display assets without requiring a CDN

>   iconBase64: string;

Author: [Related](https://github.com/MetaMask/SIPs/pull/154/files#r1923953825)

- For external images (`https:` URLs): any image
- Embedded images (`data:` URLs): SVG only (but this can be changed if needed in the future)

  // List of asset units.
  units: FungibleAssetUnit[];
};

// Represents the metadata of an asset.

> type AssetMetadata = FungibleAssetMetadata

Reviewer: Are these types already defined somewhere for the keyring API part of this?
